Distinguish SD-JWT from SD-JWT+KB (#394)
oauth-wg/oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt: draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt.md

Issuer-signed JWT. The Verifier will not, however, learn any claim
values not disclosed in the Disclosures.

This document also defines a format for SD-JWTs with Key Binding (SD-JWT+KB).
By optionally sending an SD-JWT+KB to a

> Verifier, the Holder can prove to the verifier that they hold the private key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifier, the Holder can prove to the Verifier that they hold the private key
```

Issuer-signed JWT. The Verifier will not, however, learn any claim
values not disclosed in the Disclosures.

> For SD-JWTs where the issuer is binding an SD-JWT to a public key associated to the
> Holder (e.g., using the `cnf` claim [@?RFC7800]), this document also defines a
> format for SD-JWTs with Key Binding (SD-JWT-KB).  By optionally sending an SD-JWT-KB to a
> Verifier, the Holder can prove to the verifier that they hold the private key
> associated to the SD-JWT. The strength of the binding is conditional upon the trust

Reviewer 2: It would be better to focus on the fact that the SD-JWT-KB can be used for proving something instead of focusing on the binding in the first sentence.
```suggestion
This document also defines a format for SD-JWTs with Key Binding (SD-JWT-KB).
By optionally sending an SD-JWT-KB to a
Verifier, the Holder can prove to the verifier that they hold the private key
associated to the SD-JWT (e.g., using the `cnf` claim [@?RFC7800]). The strength of the binding is conditional upon the trust
```

Issuer-signed JWT. The Verifier will not, however, learn any claim
values not disclosed in the Disclosures.

For SD-JWTs where the issuer has specified an associated public key for the
Holder (e.g., using the `cnf` claim [@?RFC7800]), this document also defines a
format for Fnords.  By sending a Fnord to a Verifier, the Holder can prove to

> the verifier that they hold the private key associated to the SD-JWT.

Reviewer 3: closing the loop on this one with PR #450

Issuer-signed JWT. The Verifier will not, however, learn any claim
values not disclosed in the Disclosures.

> For SD-JWTs where the issuer has specified an associated public key for the
> Holder (e.g., using the `cnf` claim [@?RFC7800]), this document also defines a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SD-JWTs where the issuer is binding as SD-JWT to a public key associated to the
Holder (e.g., using the `cnf` claim [@?RFC7800]), this document also defines a
```

Reviewer 3: "is binding as SD-JWT to a" should be "is binding an SD-JWT to a"?

> format for SD-JWTs with Key Binding (SD-JWT-KB).  By sending an SD-JWT-KB to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
format for SD-JWTs with Key Binding (SD-JWT-KB).  By optionally sending an SD-JWT-KB to a
```
I think the nuance of `specifies an _optional_ mechanism for key binding` of the original text should be reflected better

Verifier, the Holder can prove to the verifier that they hold the private key

> associated to the SD-JWT.

Author: I personally don't think this sentence is that helpful.  It is universally true of any system that relies on cryptographic keys, and doesn't need to be restated here.  But if folks are keen, it seems harmless.

## Feature Summary

This specification defines two primary data formats:

> 1. SD-JWT is a composite structure issued by the Issuer that consists of the following:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I'm quite happy with the wording here. We say "... is a composite structure (...) that consists of the following:". I'd then expect to see a list of exactly the things making up the SD-JWT, but I find a list of various formats and alternative formats we define in this spec. What about this?

```suggestion
1. SD-JWT is a composite structure enabling selective disclosure of its contents. The definition in this document comprises the following:
```

Same applies below for SD-JWT+KB

Reviewer 3: I think I agree with @danielfett here.

Reviewer: but than maybe makes sense to also clarify line 130 to something like `2. SD-JWT+KB is a composite structure enabling cryptographic key binding when presented to the verifier. The definition in this document comprises of the following:`

Reviewer 2: Yes, as noted in my comment :-) Applied your suggesting with small changes.

  - A format for enabling selective disclosure in nested JSON data structures,
    supporting selectively disclosable object properties (name-value pairs) and array elements
  - A format for encoding the selectively disclosable data items
  - A format extending the JWS Compact Serialization, allowing for the combined
    transport of the Issuer-signed JSON data structure and the disclosable data items
  - An alternate format extending the JWS JSON Serialization, also allowing for
    transport of the Issuer-signed JSON data structure and disclosure data

> 2. SD-JWT+KB is a composite structure that is presented to the verifier that consists of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. SD-JWT+KB is a composite structure enabling cryptographic key binding when presented to the Verifier. The definition in this document comprises the following:
```

## Feature Summary

This specification defines two primary data formats:

> * SD-JWT: A format for signed, selectively-disclosable JSON content, together
>   with a set of selectively disclosed claims

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SD-JWT: A composite structure issued by the issuer that consists of
```

  - A format for the payload of an Issuer-signed JWT containing selectively
    disclosable claims that include object properties (name-value pairs), array
    elements, and nested data structures built from these
  - A format for data associated with the JWT that enables selectively
    disclosing those claims
  - A format extending the JWS Compact Serialization, allowing for the combined
    transport of the Issuer-signed JWT and the disclosure data for selectively
    disclosed claims
  - An alternate format extending the JWS JSON Serialization, also allowing for
    transport of the Issuer-signed JWT and disclosure data

> * SD-JWT-KB: A format for proving posssion of a private key bound to an SD-JWT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SD-JWT-KB: A composite structure that is presented to the verifier that consists of the following:
```

Author: I would generally prefer that the `SD-JWT` and `SD-JWT-KB` entries be grammatically parallel, but I don't feel strongly.

  - A facility for associating a JWT to a key pair
  - A format for a Key Binding JWT that proves possession of the private key of
    the associated key pair
  - A format extending the SD-JWT format for the combind transport fo the SD-JWT
    and the proof of possession

The payload of an SD-JWT can contain a combination of selectively disclosable

> claims as well as claims that are always disclosed.  For selectively disclosable
> claims that are object properties, both the key and value are always blinded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
claims as well as claims that are always disclosed.
```
I think there is a way to blind only the object? like address: { _sd: [] } ?

Author: That's different.  What you're describing is hiding the fields within the object vs. hiding the field itself.  You're not actually hiding the `address` field, you're hiding fields within that object.  Even if you hide all the fields, you still reveal that it's an object.

There is no syntax here by which you can reveal that there is a field with a given name in an object without revealing anything about the contents of that field.

> claims that are object properties, both the key and value are always blinded.

Reviewer: I would remove "The payload of an SD-JWT can contain a combination of selectively disclosable claims as well as claims that are always disclosed." too. I think it is duplicative of the definition of SD-JWT itself.

## Feature Summary

This specification defines two primary data formats:

> 1. SD-JWT is a composite structure issued by the issuer that consists of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. SD-JWT is a composite structure issued by the Issuer that consists of the following:
```

>   - A format for the payload of an Issuer-signed JWT containing selectively
>     disclosable claims that include object properties (name-value pairs), array
>     elements, and nested data structures built from these
>   - A format for data associated with the JWT that enables selectively
>     disclosing those claims
>   - A format extending the JWS Compact Serialization, allowing for the combined
>     transport of the Issuer-signed JWT and the disclosure data for selectively
>     disclosed claims
>   - An alternate format extending the JWS JSON Serialization, also allowing for
>     transport of the Issuer-signed JWT and disclosure data

Reviewer 2: I'm aware that the proposed change is mostly re-using old text, but with the recent changes around JWS JSON-serialization, I propose to reword as follows:

```suggestion
  - A format for enabling selective disclosure in nested JSON data structures,
    supporting selectively disclosable object properties (name-value pairs) and array elements
  - A format for encoding the selectively disclosable data items
  - A format extending the JWS Compact Serialization, allowing for the combined
    transport of the Issuer-signed JSON data structure and the disclosable data items
  - An alternate format extending the JWS JSON Serialization, also allowing for
    transport of the Issuer-signed JSON data structure and disclosure data
```

2. SD-JWT-KB is a composite structure that is presented to the verifier that consists of the following:
  - A facility for associating a JWT to a key pair
  - A format for a Key Binding JWT that proves possession of the private key of
    the associated key pair

>   - A format extending the SD-JWT format for the combind transport fo the SD-JWT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - A format extending the SD-JWT format for the combind transport of the SD-JWT
```

> 2. SD-JWT-KB is a composite structure that is presented to the verifier that consists of the following:
>   - A facility for associating a JWT to a key pair
>   - A format for a Key Binding JWT that proves possession of the private key of
>     the associated key pair
>   - A format extending the SD-JWT format for the combind transport fo the SD-JWT
>     and the proof of possession

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. SD-JWT-KB is a composite structure that is presented to the verifier that consists of the following:
  - A facility for associating an SD-JWT to a key pair
  - A format for a Key Binding JWT (KB-JWT) that proves possession of the private key of
    the associated key pair
  - A format extending the SD-JWT format for the combined transport of the SD-JWT
    and the KB-JWT
```

:  Process of a Holder disclosing to a Verifier a subset of claims contained in a claim set issued by an Issuer.

Selectively Disclosable JWT (SD-JWT):
:  A composite structure, consisting of an Issuer-signed JWT (JWS, [@!RFC7515]) and zero or more Disclosures, which
   supports selective disclosure as defined in this document. It can contain both regular claims and digests of selectively-disclosable claims.

Disclosure:
:  A JSON array containing a combination of a salt, a cleartext claim name (present when the claim is a name-value pair and absent when the claim is an array element), and a cleartext claim value, which is base64url-encoded and used to calculate a digest for the respective claim. The term Disclosure refers to the whole base64url-encoded string.

Key Binding:
:  Ability of the Holder to prove legitimate possession of an SD-JWT by proving

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. When utilizing Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains

Reviewer 3: That might well be true but note that (I'm pretty sure anyway) you wrote that "control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation" text in the first place in an earlier version of this here draft.

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. When utilizing Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains

Reviewer 2: Noted, but it would be good to change that anyway.

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. When utilizing Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains

Reviewer: > The 'during issuance' part depends on the issuance protocol.

could you elaborate? with authenticated channel, there is no need for KB-JWT and even if it is there it is still `the same private key during the (synchronously happening) issuance and presentation`

i just find the current text pretty crear..

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. When utilizing Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains

Reviewer: @danielfett i am not sure i prefer a new wording...

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. When utilizing Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains

Reviewer 2: It is good practice, but not a requirement, that the wallet creates the keys and proofs control during issuance. The issuer could create the keys or an issuance protocol could skip the "proof key control" part for whatever reason. Therefore, the only place where the control is always proven is during presentation. @Sakurann

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. To be compatible with Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. When utilizing Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains
```

Reviewer 3: wfm

  the public key corresponding to the private key controlled by the Holder (or a reference to this public key).

Key Binding JWT (KB-JWT):
:  A JWT for proving Key Binding as defined in (#kb-jwt).  A Key Binding JWT is

>    said to "be tied to" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the
> SD-JWT in its `sd_hash` claim.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   said to "be tied to" a particular SD-JWT when its payload includes a hash of the
   SD-JWT in its `sd_hash` claim.
```

:  Process of a Holder disclosing to a Verifier a subset of claims contained in a claim set issued by an Issuer.

Selectively Disclosable JWT (SD-JWT):
:  A composite structure, consisting of an Issuer-signed JWT (JWS, [@!RFC7515]) and zero or more Disclosures, which
   supports selective disclosure as defined in this document. It can contain both regular claims and digests of selectively-disclosable claims.

Disclosure:
:  A combination of a salt, a cleartext claim name (present when the claim is a name-value pair and absent when the claim is an array element), and a cleartext claim value, all of which are used to calculate a digest for the respective claim.

Key Binding:
:  Ability of the Holder to prove legitimate possession of an SD-JWT by proving
  control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. To be compatible with Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains
  the public key corresponding to the private key controlled by the Holder (or a reference to this public key).

Key Binding JWT (KB-JWT):
:  A JWT for proving Key Binding as defined in (#kb-jwt).  A Key Binding JWT is

>    said to "cover" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   said to "be tied" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the
```

Reviewer 5: "protect" ? "assure" ?

> :  A JWT for proving Key Binding as defined in (#kb-jwt).  A Key Binding JWT is
>    said to "cover" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:  A JWT for proving Key Binding as defined in (#kb-jwt).  A Key Binding JWT is
   said to "be tied to" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the
```

>    in its `sd_hash` claim.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SD-JWT in its `sd_hash` claim.
```

:  Process of a Holder disclosing to a Verifier a subset of claims contained in a claim set issued by an Issuer.

Selectively Disclosable JWT (SD-JWT):
:  A composite structure, consisting of an Issuer-signed JWT (JWS, [@!RFC7515]) and zero or more Disclosures, which
   supports selective disclosure as defined in this document. It can contain both regular claims and digests of selectively-disclosable claims.

Disclosure:
:  A combination of a salt, a cleartext claim name (present when the claim is a name-value pair and absent when the claim is an array element), and a cleartext claim value, all of which are used to calculate a digest for the respective claim.

Key Binding:
:  Ability of the Holder to prove legitimate possession of an SD-JWT by proving

>   control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. To be compatible with Key Binding, an SD-JWT MUST contain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. To be compatible with Key Binding, an SD-JWT needs to contain
```
not sure it is appropriate to have MUST in a term definition?

Author: ```suggestion
  control over the same private key during the issuance and presentation. To be compatible with Key Binding, an SD-JWT contains
```

  the public key corresponding to the private key controlled by the Holder (or a reference to this public key).

Key Binding JWT (KB-JWT):
:  A JWT for proving Key Binding as defined in (#kb-jwt).  A Key Binding JWT is
   said to "cover" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the
   in its `sd_hash` claim.

Selectively Disclosable JWT with Key Binding (SD-JWT-KB):

> : A composite structure, comprising an SD-JWT and a Key Binding JWT covering the SD-JWT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: A composite structure, comprising an SD-JWT and a Key Binding JWT.
```
not sure what `covering the SD-JWT` is supposed to mean..

Reviewer 3: It's not my most favorite term but the "Key Binding JWT" definition right above does indeed say 'A Key Binding JWT is said to "cover" a particular SD-JWT if its payload includes a hash of the in its `sd_hash` claim.'

Reviewer: it's not intuitive, at least to me... Can we simply say `tied to that SD-JWT` (I modified the suggestion above)

Reviewer 3: Editors discussed this on a call and agree that we prefer saying "tied to". I'll make the corresponding comments/suggestions.

Reviewer 3: Those corresponding comments/suggestions aren't quite as straightforward as I'd expected. But it's done.

Author: I don't love "tied to", but I can live with it.

           +------------+
                 |

>            Presents SD-JWT

Reviewer 3: this read kinda awkward to me and I think things can be general in a flow diagram like this 
```suggestion
           Presents SD-JWT-KB
```

Reviewer 3: wait, what the... why can't I commit this suggestion anymore?

Reviewer: I don't know how to solve it, just know it happened to me before too...

Reviewer 3: I *think* what happened is that I committed a different related nearby suggestion (that the UI wouldn't let me do in one shot) that basically put the PR into a state of having no changes near here and thus talking this area out of the scope of suggestible changes that github will let you make in the UI. If that jumble of words even makes any sense. I "solved" it by making the changes locally and pushing to Richard's branch with 2db05069e9d8cb749142a30a4285a416fbdfc88a and then ea2500ec6ac09aba9c2988078df708f1fb1369a8 which is probably a breach of some etiquette but was the best I could manage as the situation unfolded.

>            Presents SD-JWT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
           Presents SD-JWT-KB
```

>            Presents SD-JWT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
           Presents SD-JWT~KB
```

>     including selected Disclosures,
>      or SD-JWT-KB covering SD-JWT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    including selected Disclosures
```

Note: How the public key is included in SD-JWT is out of scope of this document. It can be passed by value or by reference.

When a Verifier requires Key Binding, the Holder presents an SD-JWT+KB, which includes the

> relevant SD-JWT.  The SD-JWT+KB encodes the SD-JWT as well as a Key Binding JWT.

Reviewer 3: wfm

Note: How the public key is included in SD-JWT is out of scope of this document. It can be passed by value or by reference.

> When a Verifier requires Key Binding, the Holder presents an SD-JWT-KB covering the
> relevant SD-JWT.  The SD-JWT-KB encodes the SD-JWT as well as a Key Binding JWT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a Verifier requires Key Binding, the Holder presents an SD-JWT-KB, which includes the
relevant SD-JWT.  The SD-JWT-KB encodes the SD-JWT as well as a Key Binding JWT.
```

> The Key Binding JWT encodes a signature by the Holder's private key over:
> 
> * A hash of the SD-JWT
> * A nonce to ensure the freshness of the signature, and
> * An audience value to indicate the intended audience for the document

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Key Binding JWT encodes a signature by the Holder's private key over

* a hash of the SD-JWT,
* a nonce to ensure the freshness of the signature, and
* an audience value to indicate the intended audience for the document.
```

Details of the format of Key Binding JWTs are described in (#kb-jwt).

## Verification

At a high level, the Verifier

>  * receives either an SD-JWT or an SD-JWT-KB from the Holder
>  * verifies the signature on the SD-JWT (or the the SD-JWT inside the SD-JWT-KB) using the Issuer's public key,
>  * verifies the signature on the KB-JWT using the public key included (or referenced) in the SD-JWT, if an SD-JWT-KB was provided and the Verifier's policy requires Key Binding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * receives either an SD-JWT or an SD-JWT-KB from the Holder,
 * verifies the signature on the SD-JWT (or the the SD-JWT inside the SD-JWT-KB) using the Issuer's public key, and
 * verifies the signature on the KB-JWT using the public key included (or referenced) in the SD-JWT, if the Verifier's policy requires Key Binding.
```
Suggest to remove the "if an SD-JWT-KB was provided" part as it may be misleading.

 * calculates the digests over the Holder-Selected Disclosures and verifies that each digest is contained in the SD-JWT.

The detailed algorithm is described in (#verifier_verification).

# SD-JWT and SD-JWT-KB Data Formats {#data_formats}

> An SD-JWT is composed of:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An SD-JWT is composed of
```

* an Issuer-signed JWT, and
* zero or more Disclosures.

> An SD-JWT-KB is composed of:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An SD-JWT-KB is composed of
```

> * An SD-JWT
> * A Key Binding JWT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* an SD-JWT, and
* a Key Binding JWT.
```

Note: How the public key is included in SD-JWT is out of scope of this document. It can be passed by value or by reference.

When a Verifier requires Key Binding, the Holder presents an SD-JWT-KB covering the
relevant SD-JWT.  The SD-JWT-KB encodes the SD-JWT as well as a Key Binding JWT.
The Key Binding JWT encodes a signature by the Holder's private key over:

* A hash of the SD-JWT
* A nonce to ensure the freshness of the signature, and
* An audience value to indicate the intended audience for the document

Details of the format of Key Binding JWTs are described in (#kb-jwt).

## Verification

At a high level, the Verifier

 * receives either an SD-JWT or an SD-JWT-KB from the Holder
 * verifies the signature on the SD-JWT (or the the SD-JWT inside the SD-JWT-KB) using the Issuer's public key,

>  * verifies the signature on the KB-JWT using the public key included in the SD-JWT, if an SD-JWT-KB was provided and the Verifier's policy requries Key Binding

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
 * verifies the signature on the KB-JWT using the public key included in the SD-JWT, if an SD-JWT-KB was provided and the Verifier's policy requires Key Binding
```
I was also wondering if we should explicitly say "included (or referenced)" here as well  - similar to line 171?

Reviewer 3: probably yeah... 
```suggestion
 * verifies the signature on the KB-JWT using the public key included (or referenced) in the SD-JWT, if an SD-JWT-KB was provided and the Verifier's policy requires Key Binding
```

In the case that there is no Key Binding JWT, the last element MUST be an empty
string and the last separating tilde character MUST NOT be omitted.

The serialized format for an SD-JWT-KB extends the SD-JWT format by concatenating a Key Binding JWT.

```
<Issuer-signed JWT>~<Disclosure 1>~<Disclosure 2>~...~<Disclosure N>~<KB-JWT>
```

The two formats can be distinguished by the final `~` character that is present

> on an SD-JWT.  A Verifier that expects an SD-JWT MUST verify that its final

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on an SD-JWT.  A Verifier that expects an SD-JWT MUST verify that the final
```

In the case that there is no Key Binding JWT, the last element MUST be an empty
string and the last separating tilde character MUST NOT be omitted.

The serialized format for a Fnord extends the SD-JWT format by concatenating a Key Binding JWT.

```

> <Issuer-signed JWT>~<Disclosure 1>~<Disclosure 2>~...~<Disclosure N>~<KB-JWT>

Author: The issue we're trying to address here is the ambiguity between whether there is key _binding_, not anything about _disclosure_.

It's a good point, though, that the SD-JWT in a Fnord MUST have _visible_ key binding information (e.g., `cnf`).  If that claim is selectively disclosable, it MUST be disclosed when used in a Fnord.

> <Issuer-signed JWT>~<Disclosure 1>~<Disclosure 2>~...~<Disclosure N>~<KB-JWT>

Reviewer 3: >  that the SD-JWT in a Fnord MUST have visible key binding information (e.g., cnf). If that claim is selectively disclosable, it MUST be disclosed when used in a Fnord.

The WG draft (published a few days after that comment) has language to that effect https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt-07.html#name-selectively-disclosable-val

> <Issuer-signed JWT>~<Disclosure 1>~<Disclosure 2>~...~<Disclosure N>~<KB-JWT>

Reviewer 3: also current line 170 of the PR has "To be compatible with Key Binding, an SD-JWT MUST contain
  the public key corresponding to the private key controlled by the Holder (or a reference to this public key)."

```

The two formats can be distinguished by the final `~` character that is present
on an SD-JWT.  A Verifier that expects an SD-JWT MUST verify that its final

> `~`-separated component is empty.  A Verifier that expects an SD-JWT-KB MUST verify
> that its final `~`-separated component is a valid KB-JWT.

Reviewer 3: "~-separated" looks rather funky when reading it - I think using the word tilde here would be more good 

```suggestion
tilde-separated component is empty.  A Verifier that expects an SD-JWT-KB MUST verify
that its final tilde-separated component is a valid KB-JWT.
```

An SD-JWT without Disclosures and without a KB-JWT:
<Issuer-signed JWT>~

An SD-JWT with Disclosures and without a KB-JWT:
<Issuer-signed JWT>~<Disclosure 1>~<Disclosure N>~

> An SD-JWT+KB without Disclosures:

Reviewer 2: The text for these examples should be outside the ```-part. (Can't add a suggestion here, needs to be fixed in the PR.)

Reviewer 3: FWIW that whole thing is currently enclosed in a figure (see https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt-08.html#section-5-11) and in the interest of moving along this PR from last year, maybe that change could be addressed in a separate PR or issue?

Reviewer 3: created issue #428 so will "resolve" this conversation here

An SD-JWT without Disclosures and without a KB-JWT:
<Issuer-signed JWT>~

An SD-JWT with Disclosures and without a KB-JWT:
<Issuer-signed JWT>~<Disclosure 1>~<Disclosure N>~

> An SD-JWT-KB covering an SD-JWT without Disclosures:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An SD-JWT-KB without Disclosures:
```

<Issuer-signed JWT>~<KB-JWT>

> An SD-JWT-KB covering an SD-JWT with Disclosures:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An SD-JWT-KB with Disclosures:
```

## Key Binding JWT {#kb-jwt}

> This section defines the contents of the Key Binding JWT, which encodes a
> signature over an SD-JWT by the Holder's private key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section defines the Key Binding JWT, which encodes a
signature over an SD-JWT by the Holder's private key.
```

> The Key Binding JWT MUST contain the following elements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Key Binding JWT MUST be a JWT according to [@!RFC7519] and its payload MUST contain the following elements:
```

    * `iat`: REQUIRED. The value of this claim MUST be the time at which the Key Binding JWT was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
    * `aud`: REQUIRED. The intended receiver of the Key Binding JWT. How the value is represented is up to the protocol used and out of scope of this specification.
    * `nonce`: REQUIRED. Ensures the freshness of the signature. The value type of this claim MUST be a string. How this value is obtained is up to the protocol used and out of scope of this specification.
    * `sd_hash`: REQUIRED. The base64url-encoded hash value over the Issuer-signed JWT and the selected Disclosures as defined below.

### Binding to an SD-JWT {#integrity-protection-of-the-presentation}

> The hash value in `sd_hash` binds the KB-JWT to the specific SD-JWT that it
> covers.  The `sd_hash` value MUST be taken over the US-ASCII bytes of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The hash value in the `sd_hash` claim binds the KB-JWT to the specific SD-JWT.
The `sd_hash` value MUST be taken over the US-ASCII bytes of the
```

    * `nonce`: REQUIRED. Ensures the freshness of the signature. The value type of this claim MUST be a string. How this value is obtained is up to the protocol used and out of scope of this specification.

>     * `sd_hash`: REQUIRED. The base64url-encoded hash digest over the Issuer-signed JWT and the selected Disclosures as defined below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `sd_hash`: REQUIRED. The base64url-encoded hash value over the Issuer-signed JWT and the selected Disclosures as defined below.
```
we should probably unify to use either `hash value` or `hash digest`..

> ### Binding to an SD-JWT {#binding-to-an-sd-jwt}

Reviewer 3: changing the ref broken the build  
```suggestion
### Binding to an SD-JWT {#integrity-protection-of-the-presentation}
```

### Validating the Key Binding JWT

The Verifier MUST ensure that the key with which it validates the signature on
the Key Binding JWT is the key specified in the SD-JWT as the Holder's public
key.  For example, if the SD-JWT contains a `cnf` value with a `jwk` member, the

> could parse the provided JWK and use it to verify the Key Binding JWT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Verifier could parse the provided JWK and use it to verify the Key Binding JWT.
```

### Validating the Key Binding JWT

The Verifier MUST ensure that the key with which it validates the signature on
the Key Binding JWT is the key specified in the SD-JWT as the Holder's public

> key.  For example, if the SD-JWT contains a `cnf` value of type `jwk`, the
> Verifier would confirm that the public key's JWK represents the same key as the
> `jwk` value.  Or if the SD-JWT contains a `cnf` value of type `jwk`, then the
> Verifier could parse the provided JWK and use it to verify the Key Binding JWT.

Reviewer 3: these 4 lines now just aren't quite right (if jwk or jwk...) - here's an attempt to fix by shortening and simplifying: 

```suggestion
key.  For example, if the SD-JWT contains a `cnf` value with a `jwk` member, the
could parse the provided JWK and use it to verify the Key Binding JWT.
```

### Validating the Key Binding JWT

> The Verifier MUST ensure that the key with which it validates the signature on
> the Key Binding JWT is the key specified in the SD-JWT as the using the Holder's

Reviewer 3: seem to  be too many words in this sentence - does this still say what you wanted to say? 
```suggestion
The Verifier MUST ensure that the key with which it validates the signature on
the Key Binding JWT is the key specified in the SD-JWT as the Holder's
```

public key.  For example, if the SD-JWT contains a `cnf` value of type `jkt`,
the Verifier would confirm that the public key's JWK Thumbprint matches the `jkt`

> value.  Or if the SD-JWT contains a `cnf` value of type `jwk`, then the Verifier

Reviewer: what is "`cnf` value of type `jkt`" (i don't think it is defined in rfc7800?) and why is it used as a main example?

Reviewer 5: it lets you use a thumbprint to resolve a public key, instead of sending the public key by value. there is an analog in COSE.

Reviewer 3: It was defined (and registered) by DPoP https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9449.html#section-6.1 FWIW. But to @Sakurann's implied point, it's probably not appropriate as the main example in this draft. Or necessarily appropriate/needed as an example at all in this draft. I think the `jwk` confirmation method should be encouraged as much as possible in the SD-JWT context.

## Presentation

The following non-normative example shows an SD-JWT-KB as
it would be sent from the Holder to the Verifier. Note that it consists of six

> `~`-separated parts, with the Issuer-signed JWT as shown above in the beginning,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
tilde-separated parts, with the Issuer-signed JWT as shown above in the beginning,
```

<{{examples/simple/kb_jwt_payload.json}}

> If the Verifier did not require Key Binding, then the Holder could have
> presented the SD-JWT from (#issuance) directly, instead of encapsulating it in
> an SD-JWT-KB.
> 

Reviewer 3: the SD-JWT from (#issuance) includes many more Disclosures than the example in this section. So this sentence isn't quite right and could be confusing/misleading. Meanwhile I don't think what it's trying to say is needed right here. So:

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: is there a place where we can move this paragraph to? instead of deleting it

Reviewer 3: The suggestion to delete was b/c of it being not quite right. This tries to fix that. 
```suggestion
If the Verifier did not require Key Binding, then the Holder could have
presented the SD-JWT with selected Disclosures directly, instead of encapsulating it in
an SD-JWT-KB.

```

## Verification of the SD-JWT {#sd_jwt_verification}

> Upon receiving an SD-JWT, for example as a component of an SD-JWT-KB, a Holder

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Upon receiving an SD-JWT, directly or as a component of an SD-JWT-KB, a Holder
```

The Holder or the Verifier MUST perform the following (or equivalent) steps when receiving
an SD-JWT:

> 1. Separate the SD-JWT into the Issuer-signed JWT and the Disclosures (if any).

Reviewer 3: this is now a bit awkward as it kinda implies that, if it were an SD-JWT-KB, that it's already been separated into SD-JWT and KB parts. Which is different than prior to the PR.

Reviewer: > it kinda implies that, if it were an SD-JWT-KB, that it's already been separated into SD-JWT and KB parts.

I am not sure it does. this section is being clear that it applies only to the verification of sd-jwt and not sd-jwt-kb. if this is still a concern, making sure verification by the verifier is probably a better section to claritfy this?

Reviewer 3: Well it's a change from what was here before where this section was about general verification of the sd-jwt, which could have kb or not, and the process starts with splitting it up into the component parts. Maybe it doesn't matter though.

Reviewer 3: Thanks, I made a minor suggestion to that wording but otherwise think it's good enough to allay my concern here.

## Processing by the Holder  {#holder_verification}

The Issuer MUST provide the Holder an SD-JWT, not an SD-JWT-KB.  If the Holder
receives an SD-JWT-KB from the Issuer, it SHOULD be rejected.

For presentation to a Verifier, the Holder MUST perform the following (or equivalent) steps:

 1. Decide which Disclosures to release to the Verifier, obtaining proper End-User consent if necessary.
 2. Assemble the SD-JWT, including the Issuer-signed JWT and the selected Disclosures (see (#data_formats) for the format).
 3. If Key Binding is not required:
    1. Send the SD-JWT to the Verifier.
 4. If Key Binding is required:
    1. Create a Key Binding JWT tied to the SD-JWT.
    2. Assemble the SD-JWT-KB by concatenating the SD-JWT and the Key Binding JWT.
    3. Send the SD-JWT-KB to the Verifier.

## Verification by the Verifier  {#verifier_verification}

Upon receiving a presentation from a Holder, in the form of either an SD-JWT or
an SD-JWT-KB, in addition to the checks outlined in (#sd_jwt_verification), Verifiers need to ensure that

>  * if Key Binding is required, then the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, and 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * if Key Binding is required, then the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, and
```

 * the Key Binding JWT is signed by the Holder and valid.

To this end, Verifiers MUST follow the following steps (or equivalent):

1. Determine if Key Binding is to be checked according to the Verifier's policy
   for the use case at hand. This decision MUST NOT be based on whether
   a Key Binding JWT is provided by the Holder or not. Refer to (#key_binding_security) for
   details.

> 2. If Key Binding is required and the Holder has provided an SD-JWT, the Verifier MUST reject the presentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. If Key Binding is required and the Holder has provided an SD-JWT without Key Binding, the Verifier MUST reject the presentation.
```

Reviewer 3: I think the author of the PR would say that an SD-JWT is now without Key Binding by definition and that might suggest otherwise. How about this as a compromise on clarification? 
```suggestion
2. If Key Binding is required and the Holder has provided an SD-JWT (without Key Binding), the Verifier MUST reject the presentation.
```

## Processing by the Holder  {#holder_verification}

The Issuer MUST provide the Holder an SD-JWT, not an SD-JWT-KB.  If the Holder
receives an SD-JWT-KB from the Issuer, it SHOULD be rejected.

For presentation to a Verifier, the Holder MUST perform the following (or equivalent) steps:

 1. Decide which Disclosures to release to the Verifier, obtaining proper End-User consent if necessary.
 2. Assemble the SD-JWT, including the Issuer-signed JWT and the selected Disclosures (see (#data_formats) for the format).
 3. If Key Binding is not required:
    1. Send the SD-JWT to the Verifier.
 4. If Key Binding is required:

>     1. Create a Key Binding JWT covering the SD-JWT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    1. Create a Key Binding JWT tied to the SD-JWT.
```

>     2. Assemble the SD-JWT-KB, including the SD-JWT and the Key Binding JWT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    2. Assemble the SD-JWT-KB by concatenating the SD-JWT and the Key Binding JWT.
```

    3. Send the SD-JWT-KB to the Verifier.

## Verification by the Verifier  {#verifier_verification}

Upon receiving a presentation from a Holder, in the form of either an SD-JWT or

> an SD-JWT-KB, in addition to the checks outlined in (#sd_jwt_verification), Verifiers MUST ensure that

Reviewer 2: We avoided normative language here in this "summary" in order to not duplicate the normative requirement defined below.
```suggestion
an SD-JWT-KB, in addition to the checks outlined in (#sd_jwt_verification), Verifiers need to ensure that
```

>  * if Key Binding is required, then the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, and the Key
>    Binding is signed by the Holder and valid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * if Key Binding is required, then the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, and 
 * the Key Binding JWT is signed by the Holder and valid.
```

    1. Create a Key Binding JWT covering the SD-JWT.
    2. Assemble the SD-JWT-KB, including the SD-JWT and the Key Binding JWT.
    3. Send the SD-JWT-KB to the Verifier.

## Verification by the Verifier  {#verifier_verification}

Upon receiving a Presentation, in addition to the checks outlined in (#sd_jwt_verification), Verifiers need to ensure that
Upon receiving a presentation from a Holder, in the form of either an SD-JWT or
an SD-JWT-KB, in addition to the checks outlined in (#sd_jwt_verification), Verifiers MUST ensure that

 * if Key Binding is required, the Key Binding JWT is signed by the Holder and valid.
 * if Key Binding is required, then the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, and the Key
   Binding is signed by the Holder and valid.

To this end, Verifiers MUST follow the following steps (or equivalent):

1. Determine if Key Binding is to be checked according to the Verifier's policy
   for the use case at hand. This decision MUST NOT be based on whether
   a Key Binding JWT is provided by the Holder or not. Refer to (#key_binding_security) for
   details.
2. Process the SD-JWT as defined in (#sd_jwt_verification).
3. If Key Binding is required:

>     1. If a Key Binding JWT is not provided, the Verifier MUST reject the Presentation.

Reviewer: Is there a reason why this line was omitted?

## Processing by the Holder  {#holder_verification}

> The Issuer MUST provide the Holder and SD-JWT, not an SD-JWT-KB.  If the Holder

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Issuer MUST provide the Holder an SD-JWT, not an SD-JWT-KB.  If the Holder
```

receives an SD-JWT-KB from the Issuer, it SHOULD be rejected.

For presentation to a Verifier, the Holder MUST perform the following (or equivalent) steps:

 1. Decide which Disclosures to release to the Verifier, obtaining proper End-User consent if necessary.
 2. Assemble the SD-JWT, including the Issuer-signed JWT and the selected Disclosures (see (#data_formats) for the format).

>  3. If Key Binding is not required, send the SD-JWT to the Verifier.

Reviewer 3: it's a little abrupt/disjoint that if this condition is met, send the SD-JWT to the Verifier and end, otherwise do the next steps

 4. Create a Key Binding JWT covering the SD-JWT.
 5. Assemble the SD-JWT-KB, including the SD-JWT and the Key Binding JWT.
 6. Send the SD-JWT-KB to the Verifier.

## Verification by the Verifier  {#verifier_verification}

Upon receiving a presentation from a Holder, in the form of either an SD-JWT or
an SD-JWT-KB, in addition to the checks outlined in (#sd_jwt_verification), Verifiers MUST ensure that

 * if Key Binding is required, then the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, and the Key
   Binding is signed by the Holder and valid.

To this end, Verifiers MUST follow the following steps (or equivalent):

1. Determine if Key Binding is to be checked according to the Verifier's policy
   for the use case at hand. This decision MUST NOT be based on whether
   a Key Binding JWT is provided by the Holder or not. Refer to (#key_binding_security) for
   details.
2. If Key Binding is required and the Holder has provided an SD-JWT, the Verifier MUST reject the presentation.

> 2. If the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB, parse it into an SD-JWT and a Key Binding JWT.

Reviewer: steps 4.1 should come before steps in lines 808 and 809 (there are two steps 2 btw). in other words, the verifier need to know what mechanism it is using for key binding before rejecting because there is no KB JWT

It is important that a Verifier does not make its security policy
decisions based on data that can be influenced by an attacker or that
can be misinterpreted. For this reason, when deciding whether Key
Binding is required or not, Verifiers MUST NOT take into account:

>  * whether the Holder has provided an SD-JWT+KB or a bare SD-JWT, since otherwise a
>    attacker could strip the KB-JWT from an SD-JWT+KB and present the resulting

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
 * whether the Holder has provided an SD-JWT+KB or a bare SD-JWT, since otherwise an
   attacker could strip the KB-JWT from an SD-JWT+KB and present the resulting
```

It is important that a Verifier does not make its security policy
decisions based on data that can be influenced by an attacker or that
can be misinterpreted. For this reason, when deciding whether Key
Binding is required or not, Verifiers MUST NOT take into account:

 * whether the Holder has provided an SD-JWT-KB or a bare SD-JWT, since otherwise a
   attacker could strip the KB-JWT from an SD-JWT-KB and present the resulting
   SD-JWT, or
 * whether Key Binding data is present in the SD-JWT or not, as the
   Issuer might have added the key to the SD-JWT in a format/claim that
   is not recognized by the Verifier.

If a Verifier determines that Key Binding is required for a
particular use case and the Holder presents either a bare SD-JWT or an SD-JWT-KB with

> an invalid Key Binding JWT, then the Verifier MUST reject the presentation, as
> described in (#verifier_verification).

Reviewer 2: As above, we should not duplicate the normative language.
```suggestion
an invalid Key Binding JWT, then the Verifier will reject the presentation
when following the verification steps described in (#verifier_verification).
```

## Forwarding Credentials

> Any entity in possession of an SD-JWT can forward it to any third party
> that does not enforce Key Binding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any entity in possession of an SD-JWT (including an SD-JWT extracted from an SD-JWT-KB) can forward it to any third party
that does not enforce Key Binding.
```

In some scenarios this behavior could be desirable,
but if it is not, Issuers need to support and Verifiers need to enforce Key Binding.

## Malleability of SD-JWTs and SD-JWT-KBs

An SD-JWT is malleable, in the sense that it can be modified by adding or
removing Disclosures and still be valid.  The signature over the Issuer-signed
JWT assures the authenticity only of the hashes of the selectively-disclosable
claims, not any specific set of Disclosures.

An SD-JWT-KB is not malleable.  The signature in the Key Binding JWT covers a
specific SD-JWT, with a specific Issuer-signed JWT and a specific set of
Disclosures.  Thus, the signature on the Key Binding JWT, in addition to proving
Key Binding, also assures the authenticity and integrity of the set of
Disclosures the Holder disclosed.  The set of Disclosures in an SD-JWT-KB is the set
that the Holder intended to send; no intermediate party has added, removed, or

> modified the list of Disclosures.

Author: Yep, this looks great.  Frames with integrity, but still articulates that things can be changed.  Thanks for drafting @bc-pi

In some scenarios this behavior could be desirable,
but if it is not, Issuers need to support and Verifiers need to enforce Key Binding.

> ## Malleability of SD-JWTs and SD-JWT-KBs

Reviewer: I had to google "malleable", but guess that's only me..?

Reviewer 5: Integrity is probably a more well known term

Reviewer 3: During a call earlier today @danielfett said he'd suggest changes to rework the text in this section to avoid the use of "malleable" and rather talk about what integrity is and is not provided in each case.  

In the meantime, this would update the subsection title accordingly: 

```suggestion
## Integrity of SD-JWTs and SD-JWT-KBs
```

Author: I hesitate to make this change, because "Integrity" is about what can't be changed, and this section is about what *can* be changed.

Reviewer 3: This and the proposed changes below say essentially the same thing. But just re-framed using "Integrity" and talking about what can't be changed, which also then describes what can be changed. I belive it's a more productive way to present the concepts. And it avoids the word "malleable" which @Sakurann (and the editors) didn't believe was particularly appropriate.

Reviewer 3: trying to make this subsection title malleable again 
```suggestion
## Integrity of SD-JWTs and SD-JWT-KBs
```

<br/>

*  Claim Name: `sd_hash`

> *  Claim Description: Digest of the SD-JWT covered by an SD-JWT-KB

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*  Claim Description: Digest of the SD-JWT tied to the KB-JWT 
```

the "Media Types" registry [@IANA.MediaTypes] in the manner described
in [@RFC6838].

> Note: For the media type value used in the typ header in the Issuer-signed JWT

Reviewer 3: tick tick

```suggestion
Note: For the media type value used in the `typ` header in the Issuer-signed JWT
```

* Change Controller: IETF
* Provisional registration?  No

<br/>
To indicate that the content is an SD-JWT-KB:

* Type name: application
* Subtype name: sd-jwt-kb
* Required parameters: n/a
* Optional parameters: n/a

> * Encoding considerations: binary; application/sd-jwt-kb values are a series of base64url-encoded values (some of which may be the empty string) separated by period ('.') or tilde ('~') characters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Encoding considerations: binary; application/sd-jwt-kb values are a series of base64url-encoded values separated by period ('.') or tilde ('~') characters.
```

* Change Controller: IETF
* Provisional registration?  No

> <br/>
> To indicate that the content is an SD-JWT-KB:
> 
> * Type name: application
> * Subtype name: sd-jwt-kb
> * Required parameters: n/a
> * Optional parameters: n/a
> * Encoding considerations: binary; application/sd-jwt-kb values are a series of base64url-encoded values separated by period ('.') or tilde ('~') characters.
> * Security considerations: See the Security Considerations section of [[ this specification ]], [@!RFC7519], and [@RFC8725].
> * Interoperability considerations: n/a
> * Published specification: [[ this specification ]]
> * Applications that use this media type: TBD
> * Fragment identifier considerations: n/a
> * Additional information:
>    * Magic number(s): n/a
>    * File extension(s): n/a
>    * Macintosh file type code(s): n/a
> * Person & email address to contact for further information: Daniel Fett, mail@danielfett.de
> * Intended usage: COMMON
> * Restrictions on usage: none
> * Author: Daniel Fett, mail@danielfett.de
> * Change Controller: IETF
> * Provisional registration?  No
> 

Reviewer 3: remove the `application/sd-jwt-kb` media type per request by @selfissued and rough consensus of editors and a few others that it's not needed  
```suggestion
```

* Change Controller: IETF
* Provisional registration?  No

<br/>

> To indicate that the content is an SD-JWT-KB:

Reviewer 3: Probably makes sense to add this but I am really not looking forward to folks wanting to have `sd-jwt-kb` as the value of `typ` header in the SD-JWT itself...

Reviewer: when is this media type intended to be used? when sending sd-jwt-kb in an http request? not sure I support defining this...

Reviewer: maybe we can add this in a separate PR..?

Reviewer 2: We could add a note here saying that this media type is not for use in the issuer-signed part itself.

Author: Done!

{{examples/jsonld/disclosures.md}}

> The following is how an SD-JWT-KB over an SD-JWT that discloses only `type`, `medicinalProductName`, `atcCode` of the vaccine, `type` of the `recipient`, `type`, `order` and `dateOfVaccination` could look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is how an SD-JWT-KB that discloses only `type`, `medicinalProductName`, `atcCode` of the vaccine, `type` of the `recipient`, `type`, `order` and `dateOfVaccination` could look like:
```

<{{examples/jsonld/sd_jwt_presentation.txt}}

> 

Reviewer 3: somewhere down below there should be a document history bullet added for this

Reviewer 3: thanks @bifurcation - I now see a document history bullet somewhere down below for this change

   * Remove mention of unspecified key binding methods and the Enveloping SD-JWTs section
   * Editorial updates aimed at more consistent treatment of a Disclosure vs the contents of a Disclosure
   * Update PID example

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * Be more explicit that the VCDM and SD-JWT VC examples are only illustrative and do not define anything
```
